# Loan calculator case

# Loan Calculator – Frontend Case

React loan calculator app as part of frontend case assignment.
Built with a focus on code structure, form handling and API integration, rather than visual polish and feature perfection.

## Tech stack

- [vite](https://vite.dev/)
Builds fast with easy config, creating a great dev experience. Has good plugin and library support (including 'vitest')
The app was initially created using `npm create vite` for fast setup with minimal config.

- [tailwindcss](https://tailwindcss.com/):
Gives access to more or less everything css, without the need for css files. Speeds up styling and easy to setup with vite.

- [@tanstack/react-query](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@tanstack/react-query):
Simplifies fetching and state management. Removes the need to write complicated custom fetching hooks with error handling and state management.

- [react-hook-form](https://www.npmjs.com/package/react-hook-form):
Removes the need to manage form state and makes form validation easy.

- [vitest](https://www.npmjs.com/package/vitest) (+ @testing-library):
Implements well with vite, making it easy to write tests for react components using '@testing-library/react'

## Run locally
1. Install dependencies
```
npm install
```

2. Build app
```
> Note: `npm run build` must be run at least once before starting the dev server,
as it generates API types (via `openapi-typescript`) and icon components.
npm run build
```

3. Run dev server
```
npm run dev
```

4. Open http://localhost:5173 in your browser

## Project structure
And some components worth highlighting

```md
src/
- components/              # React components.
  - LoanCalculator.tsx     # Master component for the loan calculator form.
  - LoanTerms.tsx          # Displays loan terms including, approved, non-approved, default states.
  ...
- hooks/                   # React hooks.
  - useApiQuery.ts         # Handles react-query GET requests with the API.
  - useCalculateLoan.ts   # Handles calculate loan POST request.
- utils/                   # Helper functions
- config/
  - env.ts               # Handles env variables
- tests/components         # Tests for react components
- types/                   # Reusable type declarations, contains the generated openapi types from the API (`https://loancalculator-ivory.vercel.app/api/openapi.yaml`).
- assets/icons             # All icons used as svg files.
- App.tsx                  # Top react app layer
- index.css                # Default css, mainly generated by `npm create vite`
- main.tsx                 # Renders react to HTML
```

## Approach and choices

Probably the first consideration was what type of react app I should build this as. Should I use a framework and what package manager should I use? The choice I ultimately made was to build the app as a static ```vite``` app using ```npm```. ```vite``` was used for it's build speed and generally good dev experience, with minial config and good library support. ```npm``` was to remove fuzz and there were no good reasons to use ```yarn``` or ```bun``` for example. Additionally I choose to use ```tailwindcss``` because of how much it speeds up styling and how easy it is to setup, without loosing any serious css features.

The main technical priority from the get go was to create a form that handles form validation safely with some type safety. This is where ```react-hook-form``` comes in since it solves most of these issues out of the box.

Another choice was how to handle data fetching. To ensure a simple approach that would handle states and errors well with minimal overhead, I opted for ```@tanstack/react-query```. This works especially well with the generated types form the api (using ```openapi-typescript```), and were easy to implement into custom hooks (```useApiQuery.ts```, ```useCalculateLoan.ts```).

For testing I opted for ```vitest``` for how well it implements with ```vite``` and how it works well with ```@testing-library```. Specifically I wrote two tests:
1. ```LoanTerms.test.tsx```: Tests if the LoanTerms component renders the correct states depending on it's provided props
2. ```LoanCalculator.test.tsx```: Tests that the loan calculator renders the form correctly (and it's loading and error states) + that it submits data correctly depending on user input.
I prioritized these test because of how they ensure that visual feedback (LoanTerms) are rendered according to spec, as well as making sure the form renders, accepts data and submits correctly.

### Downprioritized items

I did not spend much time looking at styling. Basically my approach was simply to eyeball the look of the app based on the spec while relying heavily on the default styling generated by ```npm create vite```. Tailwind made it easy to for example "add padding when it looks like there is supposed to be padding". However I tried to make sure there was at least a sense of 'staying true' to the ui design.
You may note that I added an icon (chevron-down.svg) that is generated into a react component using ```svgr``` and ```svgo```. Although I initially decided this would be overkill, I eventually choose to add it regardless in order to make the ```Select.tsx``` component look correctly. The reason for this is because I already had all of the code available (including the svg) on my machine and it took me roughly 2 minutes to implement. It was essentially just a copy + paste.

I more or less spent no time creating a visually appealing loading state and error state for the app. I simply made two components displaying the states in text. Ideally the loading state would use something like skeleton loaders, and the error state would include informative text that depends on the API status.

I also did not add any true feedback for the LoanCalculator form, both that informs the user clearly of unvalidated form fields, with reasons, as well as proper states when submitting the form. Right now it mostly relies on the feedback provided by ```LoanTerms.tsx```.

One detail that I downprioritized was that the input field would include number spacing every third digit (```123 456``` rather than ```123456```). I initially planned to solved this and created the util function ```addNumberSpacing.ts```. However I noticed this would require slightly more configuration to the input elements than I initially expected, so I quickly made the decision to skip this. I did however let the input fields remain as 'text' fields rather than ```type='number'```, in order to keep the component in a state that makes it easier to add in the future.

### AI usage

Apart from using AI as a spring board throughout the development, I did generate a few things using AI:

- ```src/components/response.d.ts```: AI generated types
- ```src/hooks/useApiQuery.ts```: AI generated types
- ```src/hooks/useCalculateLoan.ts```: AI generated types
- ```src/utils/addNumberSpacing.ts```: function generated by AI, mainly for the regexp.

Overall, my philosophy for fully AI generated code is to keep it small and single purpose.


